Fertility, Household Labor Supply and Agricultural Production - 
Instrumental Variable Evidence from Uganda

Bjorn Van Campenhout

International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) - Kampala - 
Plot 15, East Naguru Road, Po Box 28565 - Kampala - Uganda - 
b.vancampenhout@cgiar.org - +256 790 833729

Bjorn Van Campenhout

Keywords: fertility, instrumental variables, household labour 
supply, agriculture, Uganda.

JEL codes: J13, J22, Q12

Abstract

Fertility is likely to affect agricultural production through its 
effect on household labor supply. Using the fact that in 
traditional, patriarchal societies sons are preferred to girls, 
we isolate exogenous variation in the number of children born to 
the mother and related it to labor supply and production outcomes 
in Uganda, a country that combines a dominant agricultural sector 
with one of the highest fertility rates in the world. We find 
that fertility has a strong negative effect on hours worked by 
the mother in the field. We also find some evidence of a negative 
effect for the father, but the size of the effect is only half 
that of the women. There is no effect on child labour. Households 
with lower fertility devote significantly more time to land 
preparation and weeding. This results in the fact that larger 
households grow less matooke and sweet potatoes. 


Abstract

Fertility is likely to affect agricultural production through its 
effect on household labor supply. Using the fact that in 
traditional, patriarchal societies sons are preferred to girls, 
we isolate exogenous variation in the number of children born to 
the mother and related it to labor supply and production outcomes 
in Uganda, a country that combines a dominant agricultural sector 
with one of the highest fertility rates in the world. We find 
that fertility has a strong negative effect on hours worked by 
the mother in the field. We also find some evidence of a negative 
effect for the father, but the size of the effect is only half 
that of the women. There is no effect on child labour. Households 
with lower fertility devote significantly more time to land 
preparation and weeding. This results in the fact that larger 
households grow less matooke and sweet potatoes.

1 Introduction

At the most basic level, subsistence farmers in rural Africa 
combine natural with human resources to make a living. They use 
mainly household labor on their own small plots to produce for 
own consumption. As such, the quantity of family labor available 
is an important determinant of well-being. Family labor 
availability, generally believed to suffer much less from moral 
hazard problems, will be a direct function of the number of 
biological children within the household. For instance, more 
children means more hands to work on the field. At the same time, 
more children means mothers, and to a lesser extend siblings and 
fathers, will need to spend more time on reproductive chores 
meaning less time will be available to spend on agricultural 
activities. Since women are known to supply most of the 
agricultural labour the loss in time needed for reproductive 
activities potentially offsets the the gains from larger 
families. 

Uganda has one of the highest fertility rates in the world and a 
substantial part of the population lives in rural areas making a 
living out of semi-subsistence agriculture. Even in the context 
of large reductions in child mortality rates, total fertility 
rates remain stubbornly high. On average, Ugandan women in rural 
areas bear 6.8 children over the course of their reproductive 
lives (UBOS, 2013). The question on how fertility affects 
well-being through its effect on household labour supply and 
agricultural production is therefore relevant. For example, 
knowledge on how fertility affects time allocation by different 
categories within the household is important to gender-stream 
efforts related to crop intensification and commercialization.

In this study, we will investigate the effect of fertility on 
agricultural production at the household level. In particular, we 
will investigate the effect of the number of biological children 
on household member labor input. We will also look at the effect 
of fertility on crop portfolio, area cultivated, production and 
productivity for the five most important crops. However, 
fertility is a choice variable to agricultural households. For 
instance, mothers who work long hours in the field may try to 
avoid becoming pregnant because this would only increase 
hardship. Or, households with low agricultural production may 
deliberately choose to have more children because this means 
cheap labor. If fertility, time allocations and agricultural 
production is indeed jointly determined, just looking at 
correlations will be misleading, and one needs to find a way to 
separate the exogenous variation from the part that is jointly 
determined.

Our identification strategy is a simple but powerful instrumental 
variables approach inspired by the work of Angrist et al. (1998). 
We use the fact that male off-springs are preferred in 
conservative, patriarchal societies to construct a range of 
instruments. The exogenous variation in the sex of a child can 
then be used to determine the exogenous component of household 
size. Such a two stage least squares approach is expected to 
yield consistent estimates for the causal effect of fertility on 
agricultural labor supply and associated agricultural production 
within the household.

There is an active debate among scholars in the field of labour 
economists on the relationship between fertility and labour 
supply. Angrist et al. (1998) use the fact that American couples 
prefer children of different sex, and and are likely to keep 
trying if the first two children are of the same sex as a source 
of exogenous variation. We will argue that in a developing 
country context, the sex of the (first born) child makes more 
sense as an instrument. Indeed, this instrumentation strategy has 
been used in such a context. Gupta et al. (2006) use the sex of 
the first two children to predict exogenous variation in 
fertility in India and its effect on well-being. We feel it is 
too ambitious to relate fertility directly to poverty and related 
measures of consumption as there may be ways in which the 
instrument can affect consumption besides through the fertility 
channel. We therefore restrict ourselves to labour allocation, 
area planted and production. In addition, most studies that look 
at the effects of fertility on labour allocation are on data from 
Asia. Well documented high incidence of selective abortion in 
these areas means the sex of the first child or children becomes 
endogenous as well. This is likely to be much less of a problem 
in our application, which is to our knowledge the first such 
application to an African country.

We find that the sex of the first-born, the sex of the first two 
children born, as well as the percentage of girls a a share of 
total children in each age cohort all significantly explain 
observed fertility, measured as the gap between actual children 
born and a theoretical maximal fecundity for each age cohort. 
Fertility has a strong negative effect on hours worked by the 
mother in the field. We also find some evidence of a negative 
effect for the father, but the size of the effect is only half 
that of the women. There is no effect on child labour. Households 
with lower fertility devote significantly more time to land 
preparation and weeding. We also find that smaller households 
grow and produce more matooke. This effect holds to a lesser 
extent for sweet potatoes. We find no impact on yields. 

This article is organized as follows. The next section gives a 
brief overview of the most prominent papers that are related to 
the present paper. Then, we make our case for the use of the sex 
of the first-born as an instrument using literature that 
documents child gender and reproductive behaviour. We then 
present the data we will use in our application, and describe our 
main variables we will use in the analysis. Next, we present the 
results. In this section, we first take a close look at the first 
stage regression. We then look at the effect of fertility on 
household labor supply, considering differential effects 
depending on household demographics as well as agricultural labor 
activities. We then turn to the effect of household size on 
productivity. A final section concludes.

  Related Studies

Fertility and the related concept of household size impacts 
household well-being trough consumption and production. Lanjouw et al. (1995)
 focus more on the consumption side effects of household size in 
a developing country context. They note the contradiction between 
widely held views that larger households are often poorer (due to 
increased competition for a given food stock) and scale economies 
in consumption. The find that, if economies of scale are 
accounted for within households, the negative correlation between 
household size and consumption expenditure disappears. On the 
production side of the farm household, the effect of household 
size is equally ambiguous. Some may argue that larger households 
means that more labor is available within the household. The 
additional advantage of this labor is that it is not subject to 
the moral hazard effects often attributed to hired labor[footnote:
For instance, Feder (1985) argues this may the reason why small 
farms appear to be more efficient than large farms
]. But at the same time, more dependents within the household 
means more time needs to be allocated to reproductive activities. 
Also, agricultural labour and agricultural production may be 
subject to diminishing returns. In this study, we will start by 
investigating the link between fertility and agricultural labour 
supply and then look at the relation between fertility and 
agricultural production respectively.

The relationship between fertility and household labor supply has 
been studied most carefully in the field of labor economics. 
Since this literature is so extensive, we only mention two of the 
most influential works here. The first is Angrist et al. (1998), 
who attempt to quantify the effect of fertility on labor supply 
in the US. They deal with the endogeneity of the number of 
children women have by exploiting the fact that Americans tend to 
prefer mixed sibling-sex in their household. They argue that 
parents of same-sex siblings are significantly and substantially 
more likely to go on to have an additional child. They find that 
more children does indeed reduce labor force participation of 
women, but the effect is less pronounced than previous studies 
suggested. They find no effect on the labour supply of the 
father.

Another paper that tries to answer the same question is Rosenzweig et al. (1980a)
. In this paper, the exogenous variation in the number of 
children is obtained by using the occurrence of multiple births 
(twins) at first birth as an instrument. The authors argue that 
the comparison between women who gave birth to a single child at 
first birth and women who gave birth to twins at first birth 
teases out the causal effect of related to an extra child. Since 
the occurrence of twins is exogenous, there is no danger that 
heterogeneity in women preferences contaminates the estimated 
coefficients. The study finds that household size reduces female 
labor supply, but the effect is only temporary[footnote:
In addition to studies that investigate the causal effect of 
household size on (female) labor supply, there are also a range 
of papers that test Becker's quantity-quality fertility model (Becker, 1960; Becker et al., 1973)
. Many of these articles also use twins (Rosenzweig et al., 1980b; Black et al., 2005)
 and/or sibling sex composition (Conley, 2000; Angrist et al., 2010)
.
].

Gupta et al. (2006) use sex of the first two children as a 
natural experiment and find that household size has a positive 
effect on poverty in India. They use essentially the same 
argument as we will make in the next section. Our study, however, 
is are less ambitious. We feel that there are too many pathways 
through which household size can influence poverty to be useful. 
In addition, welfare, and the related concept of poverty, relies 
on consumption per capita. Consumption per capita as the 
independent variable is likely to be problematic in the two stage 
least squares setting. There is a real danger that the 
instrumental variable affects the outcome variable directly, 
instead of only through its influence in family size. For 
instance, if boys consume on average more than girls, the 
exclusion restriction is violated. They confirm that high 
fertility is correlated with poverty, but the correlation 
disappears when they account for potential endogeneity of 
fertility. There is also some evidence on Indonesia. Kim et al. (2009)
 looks at the relation between consumption and fertility. In Kim et al. (2006)
, fertility is related to the allocation of labour within 
households. However, they move away from the direct instrumental 
variable approach that is standard and instead estimate a 
reproduction function taking into account endogenous 
contraceptive choice. 

All the above studies employ data from South East Asia. It is 
well-known that fertility at birth is already skewed in many 
Asian countries. For instance India, from which Gupta et al. (2006)
 drawn their sample, is particularly known for selective abortion 
of girls (Jha et al., 2011). This suggests a relationship between 
the instrument and the error term of the structural equation. It 
is well know that, in the context of weak instruments, such 
correlation can seriously bias estimates (Bound et al., 1995). 
The likely negative correlation between the instrument and the 
error term will mean that, in this case, Gupta et al. (2006)'s 
estimates are biased downward, in the direction of their original 
OLS estimate. This bias is likely to be much less pronounced in 
our data.

In our paper, we will try to address some of the above 
challenges. We will use the sex of the first-born and variations 
thereof as our instrumental variables. We will relate fertility 
to agricultural labour supply and agricultural production, since 
there is a direct link between these three variables. We will 
also concentrate on Africa. Here, while there is a boy 
preference, reproduction rate norms are high and the cost of 
raising children is low. This means that selective abortion is 
much less of a concern. Still, we rely on the sex and numbers of 
children within the family, meaning that the kind of sex 
preference as described in Jayachandran et al. (2011) may still 
render our instrument endogenous.

  Boy preference and Fertility

There is quite some evidence that parents prefer boys over girls 
in developing countries[footnote:
In developed countries, there is a preference for a mix of sexes 
among children, as shown in, for example Angrist et al. (1998).
]. For instance there is a large body of literature that looks at 
correlations between sex and variables related to well-being or 
quality of children. Significant differences in these outcomes 
are then considered proof of sex bias. Das Gupta (1987) and Sen (1990)
 look at excess mortality among female infants. Chen et al. (1981)
 and Pande (2003) investigate differential access to health. Behrman (1988)
 and Hazarika (2000) find a correlation between sex and nutrition 
and Behrman et al. (1982), Davies et al. (1995) and Alderman et al. (1998)
 all investigate correlations between the gender of children and 
education.

However, at a more basic level, boy preference is already 
revealed by parents who, if asked in for example surveys, state 
clearly that they want to have more boys than girls. Such 
preferences lead to a particular decision rule with respect to 
fertility, where the likelihood that children are added to the 
household is positively correlated to the number of surviving 
girls in the household. The preference for a boy over a girl 
results in what Jayachandran et al. (2011) refer to as a 
stop-after-a-son fertility pattern. There are many studies that 
show empirically that in settings with son preference, a couple 
that just had a son is more likely to stop having children (Das, 1987)
 or wait longer to have the next child (Trussell et al., 1985; Arnold et al., 1998; Clark, 2000; Drèze et al., 2001)
. 

Jayachandran et al. (2011) argue that son preference leads 
mothers to breastfeed daughters and children without brothers 
relatively less long. This underlying consequence of sex bias my 
partly explain a range of outcomes observed in the area of 
health, mortality and possibly even educational attainment. Their 
model shows that even when parents want both boys and girls to 
have the same health and education, disparities can arise 
passively because of fertility preferences. They show that a “try 
until you have a boy” fertility rule results in girls having on 
average more siblings, leading to more competition for resources 
within the household. 

The use of the sex of first born as an instrument is motivated by 
various cultural and economic factors documented in the 
anthropological and demographic literature. In countries where no 
old age insurance is available, parents may choose to invest more 
in children that have a higher chance of being able to support 
them at old age (Behrman et al., 1982). Anthropological and 
demographic evidence emphasize the dominant role of males in 
traditional patrilineal societies where descent and inheritance 
are transmitted through the male line. Furthermore, male children 
strengthen the relationship between the wife and her husband's 
kin (by guaranteeing the continuation of his lineage) and secure 
(the mother's) access to residence and inheritance upon the 
husband's death. Also, the practice of dowry implies that a 
daughter is often associated with an expected expenditure, a 
central part in the theoretical model of son preference in Gupta et al. (2006)
. 

Most of the evidence on boy preference comes from Asian 
countries. It is often assumed that gender preferences are much 
lower or even absent in Sub-Saharan Africa. This is surprising, 
as many of the cultural and economic factors that are observed in 
Asia equally apply to Africa. One study that documents 
significant gender bias in Africa is Anderson et al. (2010), who 
find skewed sex ratios at older age in favor of men. What is 
different from the Asian context, though, is that the vast 
majority of women are not missing at birth, but throughout the 
entire age spectrum[footnote:
The large effects documented in Anderson et al. (2010) have 
recently been attenuated in Klasen et al. (2013), who confirm 
only missing young adult women.
]. Milazzo (2012) argues that gender bias is likely not to be 
found at birth in the African context where high fertility is 
culturally valued and made less costly for families that still 
rely on the support from the extended family system. In Uganda, 
preference for boys has been documented in Beyeza-Kashesya et al. (2010)
.

Even in Western societies, preference for the firstborn to be a 
son has been observed. For example, Marleau et al. (2002) report 
an extensive list of studies that find men and/or women prefer a 
boy rather than a girl as their first-born. Even in the United 
States, the Angrist et al. (1998) provides some evidence of an 
association between having a male child and reduced childbearing 
at higher parities, in addition to the mixed-child preference. As 
such, we feel that the sex of the first-born (or closely related 
indicators) provide a valid instrument for fertility at the 
household level.

  Data and Descriptive Statistics

We will use the Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS) 2005/06. 
While being somewhat dated, we have chosen this survey because it 
has much more information on agriculture than the more recent 
UNHS of 2009/10. Structured with a standard Living Standard 
Measurement Survey - Integrated Survey on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) 
in mind, the UNHS 2005/06 collected detailed information on a 
sample of almost 43000 people in 7500 households in Uganda.

Ideally, we would like to have a sample of households where all 
desired children where born. A household that currently has one 
child may be in the process of adding more children to their 
family. Assume a couple that has just formed and is entering 
their reproductive stage. Assume further that the first child is 
a girl. In our sample, this household will show up with a smaller 
than average size, but with a girl as the firstborn, hence this 
may mistakenly be interpreted as running against our hypothesis 
that households prefer boys. If the first child is a boy, this 
same household would show up in our sample as smaller than 
average, and thus this may lead us to put too much confidence in 
our hypothesis. The fact that we are working with a cross section 
of households rather than historical data on all births by women 
that have reached the end of their reproductive lives is also 
reflected in the average number of children. This is only 3.13 
children, while women bear almost 7 children over their entire 
reproductive period. 

To deal with this problem, we work with the difference in the 
actual number of children reported and the maximum reproductive 
capacity for a woman at a certain age, rather than simply the 
number of children in the household[footnote:
Alternatively, one could use the number of children within the 
household and control for the age of the mother. We have also run 
the analysis using this strategy and got the same conclusions. 
]. We will refer to this measure of fertility as the gap or 
shortfall in fertility. To get the latter, we would need to 
estimate the average age at menarche within the population, and 
then simply divide into age the pregnancy period plus post 
pregnancy lactation in-fecund period. In addition, one would also 
need to corporate the maternal mortality ratio for "censoring" 
women's lives who have too many children and thus increasing her 
mortality rate (and exit from the sample). However, we took the 
95th percentile of total fertility rates per age from the 
Demographic and Health Survey of Uganda (2011). This is probably 
a good approximation of the upper bound by age of fertility in 
the population.

The selection of children is base on the household roster. In 
particular, we will select individuals that respond they are son 
or daughter of the household head. There is a potential problem 
when using a cross sectional survey such as the UNHS that only 
looks at reported dependents currently living within the 
household to calculate the difference between actual and 
theoretical fertility. Older women may be living in households 
where some of the older children have already left the household. 
Thus, at around the age of thirty, the gap between reported 
children in the household and theoretical fertility starts to 
increase more rapidly because of children growing old enough to 
start household of their own. More troubling, the reported gender 
of the oldest son or daughter living in the household may not be 
the gender of first-born. To overcome this problem, we restrict 
our sample to households where the mother is between 16 and 32. 
The cut off age of 32 is because at this age, the first-born of 
the mother will turn 16, which is our entry age into the sample 
of mothers.

Looking at the sex of the first-born is only one possible 
strategy. One may argue that the sex of the first born is not 
very relevant in a context where women bear on average almost 7 
children. Indeed, it is likely that households will get a second 
child irrespective of the sex of the first. This is supported by Jayachandran et al. (2011)
, who find that the difference in breastfeeding duration between 
boys and girls is largest near target family size, when gender is 
most predictive of subsequent fertility. Therefore, we will not 
only use the sex of the firstborn child as an instrument for 
fertility, but also experiment with alternative instruments such 
as an indicator that the first two children are girls or a 
variable that expresses the share of female children in the total 
family size.

  Fertility

In this section, we will present some descriptive statistics to 
check if boy preference is reflected in fertility patterns in the 
Ugandan data. Table [tab:gender-and-fertility] summarizes our 
findings. The first two columns checks if households that have a 
daughter as first-born are more likely to have extra children. We 
simply calculated the percentage of households that had more than 
one child conditional on their first born being a son or a girl. 
We find that in the sub-sample where the first child is a boy, 
about 37.46 percent of households will have at least one more 
child. However, if the first child happened to be a girl, almost 
40 percent of households will have at least one more child. 

We also look at the shortfall in actual fertility to theoretical 
fertility. In the first two columns, we report this fertility gap 
for two groups of households. We find that households that have a 
boy as the firstborn child have an average fertility gap of about 
2.46 children. Consistent with the proposition that have a 
firstborn girl are likely to have more children conditional on 
age, we find that the gap is smaller then the firstborn is a girl 
(2.26). In other words, households where the firstborn is a girl 
will be closer to the theoretical maximal fertility than those 
that had a boy as the firstborn. The difference in the fertility 
gap between the group of households with a first born boy and a 
first born girl is significant (p=0.003).

The third and fourth column present the same statistics, but now 
looks the sex of the first two children. As such, there are three 
possible scenarios. If the first two children are both boys, we 
expect that the chance that they have extra children is lowest. 
We find the probability of adding children in this case to be 
just over 13 percent. If the first was a girl and the second was 
also a girl, we expect there is a higher chance that parents 
choose to have extra children. In this case, there is an almost 
14 percent chance that they add at least one child to the 
household. For those that had a first girl but their second child 
was a boy, we expect the probability of increasing household size 
to lie between the two, which is indeed the case. The lower panel 
shows that the gap between actual and potential household size is 
largest when the first two children are boys. The gap is smallest 
when the first two children are both girls.

Finally, we compare the average fertility in two different groups 
defined by the share of female children within the total number 
of children. As already stated above, because of boy preference, 
female children are likely to live in larger families. We indeed 
find that if there are more girls than boys amongst the children, 
the average number of children is higher. We also find a 
difference in the fertility gap that is significant with 
associated p-value of 0.021.

[float Table:
[Table 1:
gender and fertility<tab:gender-and-fertility>
]


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              prob +1                          prob +1                       av fertility  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1st=boy      0.375      1st=boy, 2nd=boy     0.132      % daughters<0.5        2.78      
  1st=girl     0.393     1st=girl, 2nd=boy      0.134     % daughters>0.5        2.88      
                         1st=girl, 2nd=girl     0.139                                      
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                gap                              gap                             gap       
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1st=boy      2.46       1st=boy, 2nd=boy      2.46      % daughters<0.5        2.41      
  1st=girl     2.26      1st=girl, 2nd=boy      2.38      % daughters>0.5        2.32      
                         1st=girl, 2nd=girl     2.06                                       
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

]

  Hours worked 

In this section we will briefly look at some descriptive 
statistics on labor supply, one of the prime pathways through 
which fertility affects productivity and well-being. Most of 
Uganda has two cropping seasons. The first runs from January to 
June. The second cropping season is from July to December. The 
UNHS 2005/06 interviewed households twice over the course of one 
year to capture this feature. It visited households in the 
beginning of 2005 to capture the second cropping season in 2004 
(that is, running from July to December 2004). Households were 
revisited at the end on 2005 to record information from the first 
cropping season in 2005 (running from January to June 2005). In 
our study, we will only consider the 2004 cropping season, as 
data for labour allocation to agriculture was unavailable for the 
2004 cropping season.

Figure [fig:Average-hours-worked] shows time reported on the 
field along different dimensions[footnote:
The dimensions are mother, father or child; land preparation, 
input application, weeding and harvesting; and crop. The crops 
are the five most grown crops.
]. One of the most obvious observations is that women do most of 
the work, and child labor is restricted to about one day per crop 
and activity during the entire season. This already indicates 
that the trade-off between the time lost by the mother because of 
rearing the children and the time gained by extra hands is likely 
to work against agricultural production. Typical for Uganda is 
the low amount of time spent on applying inputs. Farmers in 
Uganda use very limited amounts of fertilizer and other inputs, 
so also the time spend on applying them is small. There is also 
some heterogeneity in the time spend on different crops. For 
instance, matooke requires less time than maize, both for men and 
for women. However, there are also difference between the sexes. 
For instance, women spend much more time cultivating sweet 
potatoes, and to a lesser extent beans, than men. 

[float Figure:
[Figure 1:
Average hours worked<fig:Average-hours-worked>
]

<Graphics file: /home/bjvca/data/data/fertility and ag productivity/dotplot.pdf>
]

  Production<sub:Production>

We also investigate the effect of fertility on production of some 
of the most important crops. More in particular, we look at the 
effect of fertility on the likelihood that a household cultivates 
each of the five most important crops. The first row in table [tab:2averages]
 reports on the percentage of households that grow each of the 
crops. Over 50 percent report growing maize, beans and cassava. 
We also look at the impact on area cultivated, measured in acres. 
Households on average allocate about half an acre to maize. The 
least space is reserved for sweet potatoes. We also express area 
cultivated as a share of total area under cultivation. We find 
that about 17 percent of total land area is allocated to maize. 
The next line reports average production in kilograms at the 
household level. This may seem low, but this because households 
that report not to produce the crop are also part of the average. 
We also divide by household size. Finally, we report yields for 
the five crops, defined as the amount of each crop harvested per 
unit of land (per acre).

We also aggregate the different corps by weighing them to average 
prices. We use prices from FoodNet. In particular, we average 
prices observed in Kampala's Nakawa market over the July to 
December 2004 period. Doing so, we find that the average total 
value derived from these five crops is about UGX98,500, which 
translates to about UGX45000 per capita. About 40 percent of the 
households in their reproductive age does not cultivate any of 
these five crops. On average, about 0.69 acres is allocated to 
these five crops. The yield per acre is about UGX220,220.

[float Table:
[Table 2:
Averages<tab:2averages>
]


]

  Results

  The first stage regression

The first stage regression results that link sex of first 
child/children to fertility are reported in table [tab:firststage]
. The dependent variable, as explained above, is the difference 
between the maximum number of children of a typical woman at her 
age and the actual number of children born from the mother[footnote:
The maximum number of children has been estimated from the DHS 
and is actually the 95th percentile.
]. We will refer to this as the fertility gap (fgap) or fertility 
shortfall. It actually is the reverse of fertility, as the higher 
the gap, the lower the number of children in the household in a 
given age cohort. Apart from the exogenous variable that is 
excluded from the second stage regression elaborated in the next 
paragraphs, we include a series of control variables that are 
clearly exogenous to fertility in all 4 specifications of the 
first stage. The first exogenous control variable, femhead, is a 
an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the household 
head is female. The second, urban, is an indicator variable that 
takes the value of 1 if the household resides in an urban area[footnote:
In some specifications where we expect regional variation in the 
outcome variable to be important, such as for production and 
yields for certain crops, we also include dummies for the four 
regions in both the first and second stage equations. This 
addition did not significantly change other estimated parameters 
in the first stage.
]. Next, we include three dummies to account for the education 
level of the mother. mprim take the value of 1 if the mother has 
completed primary eduction. msec is the additional effect of 
having completed secondary education. Thus, if msecond is one, 
mprim is also 1. mthird is the additional effect of the mother 
having completed tertiary education. The comparison category are 
therefore households where the mother did not complete at least 
primary education. We also add two community variables which are 
likely to influence household size. These are school which is a 
dummy variable that takes the value of one if there is a school 
in the village and health is a dummy that takes the value of one 
if there is a public health centre or clinic in the community. 
Finally, we also add an indicator (cdied) that takes the value of 
one if a son or daughter of the mother has died in the past.

We experiment with four different possible excluded instruments. 
Model (1) uses an indicator that takes the value of one if the 
firstborn in the household is a girl as an excluded instrument. 
The coefficient is significant at the one percent level and has 
the expected sign. Having a girl as a first-born reduces that 
fertility gap by about 0.2 children. In other words, households 
that have a girl as a first-born tend to be closer to maximal 
fecundity. For the controls, we find that households where 
females are the head have a significantly larger fertility gap. 
The effect is very large, suggesting such mothers have more than 
1 child less. Also in urban areas, households seem to have less 
children, as a significantly larger difference indicates. 
Schooling of the mother seems to reduce the number of children 
only at secondary and tertiary level. There seems to be some 
indication that mothers that completed primary education have a 
slightly smaller fertility gap than mothers that did not even 
complete primary education. The community variables do not seem 
to have an effect on the fertility gap. Finally, having lost a 
child in the past leaves a significant additional fertility gap 
compared to households that never lost a child. However, the 
additional gap is much lower than one, suggesting a substantial 
replacement effect in Ugandan fertility. The constant indicates 
that the overall average fertility gap is about two children.

Model (2) uses as excluded instrument an indicator that equals 
one if the first two children born to the mother in the household 
are both girls. Using this instrument only makes sense if we 
confine ourselves to households that have at least two children, 
hence the reduction in the sample size. As in (1) the parameter 
is significantly negative according to expectations. The control 
variables are very close to the what they were in model (1). 
Model (3) goes one step further and considers the first three 
children. In this case, the indicator thirdoldestgirl is one only 
if the three first children are all girls. This again only makes 
sense in households that have at least three children. The 
coefficient estimate is again negative, but this time it is not 
significant anymore. 

Model (4) uses a continuous variable as excluded instrument. We 
calculated the share of girls among children as a share of the 
total number of children in the household. Again, the coefficient 
has the expected sign. A higher share of females within the 
households is associated with a lower fertility gap. This is 
consistent with Jayachandran et al. (2011), who observe the “try 
until you have a boy” fertility rule leads to an outcome where 
larger households have on average more girls. Again, the included 
instruments are similar to the previous models. We find that an 
all female siblings household will be on average 0.28 children 
larger than an all boys siblings household.

While most of our instruments are significant and have the 
expected sign, they account for only a small part of the variance 
in the outcome. Even when other exogenous controls are included, 
the R-squared is low. If we regress the indicator variable of a 
first girl on the dependent variable, the R-square drops below 1 
percent. The F-value of a regression with only the excluded 
instrument, another important indicator of the strength of the 
instruments according to Bound et al. (1995), also drops to 9.46[footnote:
As a rule of thumb, it is often stated that one has weak 
instruments if this F-statistic is smaller than 10.
]. In other words, we have serious concerns that our instruments 
are weak. We therefore use inference that is robust to weak 
instruments. In particular, we rely on the Anderson-Rubin test 
statistic to gauge the significance of the endogenous variable in 
all subsequent regressions (Staiger et al., 1997). 

[float Table:
[Table 3:
OLS estimation of household size<tab:firststage>
]


]

  Household labor supply

We now turn to look at the effect of fertility on total household 
labor supply (table [tab:totlabour]). We will also look at labor 
supply separately for the mother, the father and the children 
(table [tab:2SLS-estimates-of]). We will also look at labor 
supply by activity (table [tab:2SLS-estimates-allocation]). 

[float Table:


[Table 4:
Effect of fertility on total hours worked in agriculture<tab:totlabour>
]
]

In table [tab:totlabour], we investigate the effect of our main 
variable of interest, the fertility shortfall, on the number of 
days worked in agriculture (land preparation, input application, 
weeding and harvesting)[footnote:
We have also done this analysis using days worked per acre of 
land held by the household. However, since average land holdings 
are about 1.1 acre and there seems to be no systematic 
relationship between farm size and labor supply, the results are 
very similar. 
]. The first column of the table reports the result without 
taking into account endogeneity of number of children. It reports 
OLS estimates for the number of days the reported working on the 
household farm, engaging in land preparation, input application, 
weeding and harvesting. We see that there is no significant 
correlation between the number of days worked and fertility as 
measured by the fertility gap. We do find significant and 
negative effects of the household being headed by a female and 
the household being located in an urban area. The education of 
mothers does not seem to be systematically related to the hours 
worked in agriculture. The OLS estimates also show positive 
correlations between a school in the community and hours worked 
in agriculture and between a deceased child in the past and hours 
worked. There is also some indication of a positive correlation 
between health centers in the community and hours worked. On 
average, households report working about 90 labor days on the 
field in the July to December 2004 cropping season. 

Models (2) to (4) estimate the same models, but instrument the 
fertility gap with a single gender related excluded instrument. 
In model (2), the instrument is an indicator taking the value of 
one if the firstborn is a girl. The coefficient on the fertility 
gap now becomes positive, but remains insignificant. Model (3) 
uses the sex of the first and second born as instruments for the 
fertility gap. The size of the fertility effect becomes larger, 
but still not significantly different from zero. Model (4) uses 
the share of daughters as an instrument. The estimate is positive 
and significant, implying that higher fertility (and hence a 
shrinking fertility gap) reduces the number of days worked on the 
field. 

Finally, model (5) uses both the gender of the firstborn and the 
share of daughters as instruments[footnote:
We use Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML), as this is 
known to have better small sample properties than 2SLS in 
overidentified models with weak instruments (Angrist et al., 2001)
.
]. According to Hansen-J statistic, our model that uses multiple 
instruments is valid (Hansen-J=0.849; p-val=0.357). We thus 
assume this is the best specification. Each additional child 
causes a reduction of about 62 days of labour in agriculture. 
With respect to the other variables in the regression, we find 
some signs that households with women that have finished tertiary 
education appear to be less engaged in agriculture.

In table [tab:2SLS-estimates-of], we differentiate between work 
done by the mother, the father and the children. We only show the 
coefficient on the fertility gap, but we also added the exogenous 
control variables that were also included in the first stage 
regression. Full results can be found in the appendix. 

The top panel in table [tab:2SLS-estimates-of] shows the effect 
of fertility on hours worked by the mother. The OLS estimate is 
not significant (model (1)). Accounting for endogeneity of 
fertility using the exogenous variation caused by the sex of the 
firstborn renders the fertility gap significant at a 5 percent 
level (model (2)). Mothers work on average more than 50 days in 
agriculture. Cycling through the results with the alternative 
instruments, the results change little with respect to 
significance. In all, an additional child seems to reduce hours 
worked by the mother in agricultural production by about 40 days. 
Full results are reported in table [tab:appendixmotherh].

In the first column of the middle panel, we report the same OLS 
regression but with the number of days worked by adult males as 
the dependent variable. As is the case with female labour, the 
fertility gap does not seem to be correlated to male layout 
supply. Table [tab:Effect-on-maileappend] in the appendix gives 
full results. The constant is much lower, reflecting that women 
work more than ten days more on the field during the season, on 
average. We find that residing in urban areas leads farmers 
reporting less days worked on the field. We also find a large 
negative effect of female headedness on hours worked by the male. 
This is because in most cases, households are headed by females 
because the male head is missing, leading to less hours reported 
on the field. We also find some evidence of males working less if 
the mother has higher eduction. This is most likely because 
higher educated men choose higher educated women to marry and the 
other way around.

Judged by the instrumental variable models from (2) to (5) the 
effect of fertility on labour supply by the father is less clear 
cut. When using the sex of the first born (model 2) and the sex 
of the first two children born (model 3) as instruments, the 
coefficient is positive but not significantly different from 
zero. If we instrument the fertility gap using the percentage of 
females, we find some indication that more children may reduce 
time allocated to working on the field my males. The effect, 
however, is much smaller than the reduction found for women. The 
over-identified model in model (5) shows a significant effect at 
the 10 percent level only.

[float Table:
[Table 5:
2SLS estimates of household labor supply<tab:2SLS-estimates-of>
]


]

The last panel looks at the number of days children are reported 
to be working in agriculture. As in the case of male members, 
there is no correlation with fertility for the OLS specification 
in model (1). Full results are again reported in the appendix 
(Table [tab:Effect-appchildren]). There also seems to be no 
difference between rural and urban areas. However, female headed 
households are associated with lower levels of child labor. There 
is also weak evidence that a school and a health center in the 
community reduce child labour. Children work on average about 7 
days on the field.

When we instrument the fertility gap by the sex of the 
first-born, the coefficient remains negative. This is different 
from what we find for days worked by the mother or the father. 
This would mean that a lower fertility reduces the hours worked 
by children on the field. However, the coefficient becomes only 
significantly at a p-value of 0.162 for the Anderson-Rubin test.

These findings are similar to what others have found. For 
instance, in their study on labour supply response to fertility 
in the United States, Angrist et al. (1998) also find that women 
work less while men do not alter their labour supply in response 
to more children. Kim et al. (2006) find that women reduce their 
working hours in response to the higher fecundity in both rural 
and urban areas in Indonesia. 

[float Table:
[Table 6:
2SLS estimates of household labor allocation<tab:2SLS-estimates-allocation>
]


]

Table [tab:2SLS-estimates-allocation] looks at reported labor by 
activity instead of by sex. Again, the results reported in table [tab:2SLS-estimates-allocation]
 only show the coefficients on the fertility gap. Full results 
are in the appendix.

Model (1) in the top panel presents OLS results for number of 
days reported to be spending on land preparation. On average, the 
household spends about 38 days preparing land (table [tab:prepappe]
). There are no fertility effects. Again, as expected, households 
residing in urban areas spend significantly less time preparing 
land. Female headed households also allocate less time to land 
preparation. There is also some indication that women that have 
tertiary education are less engaged in land preparation.

Model (2) presents the same model, but instruments fertility with 
the indicator for the first child being a girl. The fertility 
effect now becomes positive, but is not siginificantly different 
from zero. In model (3), where we look at the sex of the first 
two children, the fertility gap effect becomes significant. The 
effect remains significant when we instrument the fertility 
shortfall by the percentage of females born (model (4)) and in 
the over-identified model (5), but the effect size reduces. An 
additional child reduces time allocated to land preparation by 
about 25 days.

The second panel repeats the same five models, but uses hours 
spent on input application as the dependent variable. In none of 
the five specifications, fertility seems to have a significant 
impact. Overall, time spend on input application is very limited 
anyway, as can be seen in figure [fig:Average-hours-worked]. In 
all, households spend only about one day applying inputs 
(including planting). The only significant effect we find is that 
households where the mother has at least primary education 
allocate more time to input application.

The third panel presents results for time spend on weeding. The 
results are similar to the ones for land preparation, but the 
effects are smaller. Households spend on average 30 days weeding 
and each extra child reduces this by about 20 days. Full results 
in the appendix (table [tab:timeweeding]) show significant 
negative effects for female headed households and for households 
in urban areas. We also find that communities that have a health 
center are spending less hours on weeding. 

Finally, the last panel looks at the effects of fertility on days 
worked for harvesting. There is no significant positive 
association between the number of children in the family and the 
number of days spend harvesting. The average number of days is 
about 26 days, lower than time allocated to both preparing the 
land and weeding. 

The above suggests that fertility affects time allocated to land 
preparation and weeding in a negative way. Harvesting seems to be 
less related to family size. Probably, when crops are ready to be 
harvested, farmers are more likely to put in the extra effort. 
This seems to be less evident for work that has an uncertain 
payoff in the future. The reductions of time allocated to land 
preparation and weeding may reduce both area planted and 
agricultural productivity. We will turn to this in the next 
section.

  Area planted, Production and Productivity

[float Table:
[Table 7:
2SLS estimates of Area planted, Production and Productivity<tab:2SLS-estimates-area>
]


]

We will now look at the effect of fertility on production and 
productivity. We will look at productivity defined as kilograms 
harvested per acre of the five most important products 
separately. We will also look the value of total production, the 
value of production per acre and the value of production per 
capita. 

Table [tab:2SLS-estimates-area] reports on the second stage 
regression of different aspects of production for the five most 
important crops. The table only reports the result coefficient on 
our fertility variable for the instrumental variable regression 
that uses the share of girls as excluded instrument. The 
regressions include the same control variables as in the previous 
sections. However, we now also added regional dummies, as some 
crops are grown more in some regions than in others. If the 
dependent variable is binary or censored, a tobit or probit is 
estimated using the methods described in Newey (1987).

The first row takes as the outcome variable a dummy that is one 
if the household reported growing the crop and zero otherwise. We 
therefore estimated probit models that show us if additional 
children increase or decrease the likelihood that the household 
reports growing a certain crop. We find no significant effects 
for most crops. Only for sweet potatoes and for matooke it seems 
that a larger fertility gap increases the chance of growing the 
crop. 

The next row looks at the total area reported to be used to grow 
each crop, measured in acres. We find a positive effect of the 
fertility gap on the area used to grow matooke. The next row 
looks at the area as a share of total area. In this case, it 
seems that households with more children allocate less land as a 
share of total land to sweet potatoes.

The next row looks at the value of total production in kg. Only 
for matooke, again larger households seem to obtain a 
significantly lower quantity of matooke. The next row looks at 
production per capita. The lower production of matooke persists 
if we account for household size. Finally, for none of the 
products, the fertility gap has a significant effect on yield.

[float Table:
[Table 8:
2SLS estimates of total production<tab:2SLS-totals>
]


]

In table [tab:2SLS-totals] we present results on total production 
and productivity, using the prices for the different crops as 
described in section [sub:Production]. We present again five 
different models. The first one a regression that does not take 
endogeneity into account. While in the previous regressions this 
was typically OLS, this may now change to a probit or tobit 
regression, depending on the nature of the dependent variable. 
The second regression instruments the fertility gap with the sex 
of the firstborn. The third model uses the sex of the first two 
children born to the mother and the fourth uses the share of 
women amongst the children. As before, the fourth model 
instruments the fertility difference by two instruments: the sex 
of the firstborn and the share of girls among the children. If 
the dependent variable is binary or censored, a tobit or probit 
is estimated using the methods described in Newey (1987).

The first row gives results for the change in production. There 
seems to be no detectable effect from fertility on the total 
value of the production of the five crops. The second row 
expresses this production in per capita terms. The OLS estimates 
show a positive effect of an increase in the fertility gap. 
However, if we confine to the exogenous part of fertility in the 
IV regressions, the effect disappears. The next row looks at a 
change in the total area allocated to the five crops. There is 
again no significant effect from fertility. The final row, which 
looks at productivity defined as the total value of the five 
crops divided by the total area allocated to these five crops, 
also finds no causal impact from family size.

  Conclusion

In this paper, we look at the effect of fertility, defined as the 
number of biological children born to the mother, on agricultural 
production and its determinants. One of the most evident 
determinants is household agricultural labour. More children 
means more labour is available within the household. However, 
more children also means that time of the most productive persons 
within the family farm, adult females, is lost to reproductive 
chores. In this paper, we try to isolate the causal effect of 
extra children on household labour supply and production.

The identification strategy we use relies on the premise that, in 
partilineal societies, boys are preferred to girls in terms of 
offspring. Households that have a girl as the first child will 
have a higher propensity to add more children to the household. 
The fact that the sex of the first child is exogenous can be used 
to identify the causal impact of additional children on other 
variables such as labour supply and productivity. Similarly, the 
fertility rule whereby one is more likely to stop having children 
after a boy means that, on average, larger households consist of 
more girls. Therefore, the share of females in the total number 
of children.

Our first stage regression performs reasonably well. We find a 
significant negative effect of an indicator variable that the 
first-born is a girl on a variable that measures the shortfall 
from fecundity. We equally find a negative effect of an indicator 
that the first two children are female. Finally, we also find 
that households with a relatively higher share of girls are 
negatively related to the fertility gap. While our instruments 
are significant and have the correct sign, explanatory power as 
measured by the partial R-squared is low. We therefore use 
inference methods in the second stage that are robust to weak 
instruments.

In the second stage regression, we find that fertility affects 
both time women and men allocated to agricultural production. 
However, most of the labour time lost as a consequence of an 
exogenous increase in children is born by the woman. Especially 
land preparation and weeding are activities that seem to be 
reduced as a response to more children. When we look at crops, we 
find that only matooke and sweet potatoes are significantly 
affected by fertility. 

Matooke is the most important stable crop in Uganda, providing 18 
percent of caloric intake (Haggblade et al., 2010). The finding 
that young households that have higher fertility are reducing the 
most important source of calories suggests that higher fertility 
also causes under-nutrition. Sweet potatoes is also a typical 
food security crop, with a low return but also low risk (Dercon, 1996)
. It is also a crop that is mostly under the control of the 
woman, who does much of the work on the field. Taken together, 
our analysis suggests fertility to be a serious threat to food 
security for these households.

That said, the fact that we rely on a cross-section of households 
also limits to what extent our conclusions can be generalized. It 
may well be that households that are at a later stage in their 
life cycle profit much more from larger household size. For 
instance, in households where the mother has reduced fertility, 
she may have more time to work in agricultural activities. In 
addition, children are likely to be older and much more 
productive in agriculture. Therefore, we want to stress that our 
results only hold for the subset of “young” households, where the 
women is between 16 and 32.

There are different ways in which the negative effect of 
fertility on labour and production can be influenced. First, our 
analysis reconfirms the need for fertility reducing policies. 
Apart from known fertility reducing policies such as women 
education and improved maternal health care, the most promising 
policies would try to work on the root cause of increased 
fertility. This should be done by reducing the propensity of 
households to have higher fertility if the firstborn is a girl. 
We think of a host of policies that go against the patrilineal 
nature of these societies. For example, Uganda may consider 
changing its land act similar to what Kenya recently did and give 
equal inheritance rights to both girls and boys. 

The above policy response involves addressing cultural issues 
related to high fertility, some of which may face considerable 
resistance. Changing a set of cultural values is likely to be a 
very slow process. Meanwhile, the government of Uganda should 
support the nutritional needs of young families. It should also 
consider introducing agricultural technologies that save on 
agricultural labour, especially for women.

References

[Alderman et al. 1998] Alderman, Harold and King, Elizabeth M., "Gender differences in parental investment in education", Structural Change and Economic Dynamics  9, 4 (1998), pp. 453--468.

[Anderson et al. 2010] Anderson, Siwan and Ray, Debraj, "Missing Women: Age and Disease", Review of Economic Studies  77, 4 (2010), pp. 1262--1300.

[Angrist et al. 1998] Angrist, Joshua D and Evans, William N, "Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply: Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size", American Economic Review  88, 3 (1998), pp. 450--77.

[Angrist et al. 2001] Angrist, Joshua D. and Krueger, Alan B., "Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments", Journal of Economic Perspectives  15, 4 (2001), pp. 69--85.

[Angrist et al. 2010] Angrist, Joshua and Lavy, Victor and Schlosser, Analia, "Multiple Experiments for the Causal Link between the Quantity and Quality of Children", Journal of Labor Economics  28, 4 (2010), pp. 773--824.

[Arnold et al. 1998] Arnold, F and Choe, M.K and Roy, T.K., "Son preference, the family-building process and child mortality in India", Population Studies  52, 3 (1998), pp. 301--315.

[Becker 1960] Becker, Gary S., "An Economic Analysis of Fertility", in Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries (National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 1960), pp. 209--240.

[Becker et al. 1973] Becker, Gary S and Lewis, H Gregg, "On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children", Journal of Political Economy  81, 2 (1973), pp. S279--88.

[Behrman 1988] Behrman, Jere R, "Intrahousehold Allocation of Nutrients in Rural India: Are Boys Favored? Do Parents Exhibit Inequality Aversion?", Oxford Economic Papers  40, 1 (1988), pp. 32--54.

[Behrman et al. 1982] Behrman, Jere R and Pollak, Robert A and Taubman, Paul, "Parental Preferences and Provision for Progeny", Journal of Political Economy  90, 1 (1982), pp. 52--73.

[Beyeza-Kashesya et al. 2010] Beyeza-Kashesya, Jolly and Neema, Stella and Ekstrom, Anna Mia and Kaharuza, Frank and Mirembe, Florence and Kulane, Asli, "Not a boy, not a child: A qualitative study on young people's views on childbearing in Uganda", African Journal of Reproductive Health  14, 1 (2010), pp. 71--81.

[Black et al. 2005] Black, Sandra E. and Devereux, Paul J. and Salvanes, Kjell G., "The More the Merrier? The Effect of Family Size and Birth Order on Children's Education", The Quarterly Journal of Economics  120, 2 (2005), pp. 669--700.

[Bound et al. 1995] Bound, John and Jaeger, David A. and Baker, Regina M., "Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous Explanatory...", Journal of the American Statistical Association  90, 430 (1995), pp. pp. 443--450.

[Chen et al. 1981] Chen, Lincoln C. and Huq, Emdadul and D'Souza, Stan, "Sex Bias in the Family Allocation of Food and Health Care in Rural Bangladesh", Population and Development Review  7, 1 (1981), pp. 55--70.

[Clark 2000] Clark, Shelley, "Son preference and sex composition of children: Evidence from india", Demography  37, 1 (2000), pp. 95--108.

[Conley 2000] Conley, Dalton, "Sibship Sex Composition: Effects on Educational Attainment", Social Science Research  29 (2000), pp. 441-- 457.

[Das 1987] Das, Narayan, "Sex preference and fertility behavior: A study of recent Indian data", Demography  24, 4 (1987), pp. 517--530.

[Das Gupta 1987] Das Gupta, Monica, "Selective discrimination against female children in rural Punjab, India", Population and Development Review  13 (1987).

[Davies et al. 1995] Davies, James B and Zhang, Junsen, "Gender Bias, Investments in Children, and Bequests", International Economic Review  36, 3 (1995), pp. 795--818.

[Dercon 1996] Dercon, Stefan, "Risk, Crop Choice, and Savings: Evidence from Tanzania", Economic Development and Cultural Change  44, 3 (1996), pp. 485--513.

[Drèze et al. 2001] Drèze, Jean and Murthi, Mamta, "Fertility, Education, and Development: Evidence from India", Population and Development Review  27, 1 (2001), pp. 33--63.

[Feder 1985] Feder, Gershon, "The relation between farm size and farm productivity : The role of family labor, supervision and credit constraints", Journal of Development Economics  18, 2-3 (1985), pp. 297--313.

[Gupta et al. 2006] Gupta, Nabanita Datta and Dubey, Amaresh, "Fertility and the household's economic status: A natural experiment using Indian micro data", Journal of Development Studies  42, 1 (2006), pp. 110--138.

[Haggblade et al. 2010] Haggblade, Steven and Dewina, Reno, "Staple food prices in Uganda", Michigan State University, Department of Agricultural, Food, and Resource Economics (2010).

[Hazarika 2000] Hazarika, G., "Gender Differences in Children's Nutrition and Access to Health Care in Pakistan", Journal of Development Studies  37, 1 (2000), pp. 73--92.

[Jayachandran et al. 2011] Jayachandran, Seema and Kuziemko, Ilyana, "Why Do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less than Boys? Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India", The Quarterly Journal of Economics  126, 3 (2011), pp. 1485--1538.

[Jha et al. 2011] Jha, Prabhat and Kesler, Maya A and Kumar, Rajesh and Ram, Faujdar and Ram, Usha and Aleksandrowicz, Lukasz and Bassani, Dieg..., "Trends in selective abortions of girls in India: analysis of nationally representative birth histories from 1990 to 2005 and...", The Lancet  377, 9781 (2011), pp. 1921--1928.

[Kim et al. 2006] Kim, Jungho and Aassve, Arnstein, "Fertility and its Consequence on Family Labour Supply", Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) (2006).

[Kim et al. 2009] Kim, Jungho and Engelhardt, Henriette and Prskawetz, Alexia and Aassve, Arnstein, "Does fertility decrease household consumption?", Demographic Research  20, 26 (2009), pp. 623--656.

[Klasen et al. 2013] Klasen, Stephan and Vollmer, Sebastian, "Missing Women: Age and Disease: A Correction", Courant Research Centre PEG (2013).

[Lanjouw et al. 1995] Lanjouw, Peter and Ravallion, Martin, "Poverty and Household Size", Economic Journal  105, 433 (1995), pp. 1415--34.

[Marleau et al. 2002] Marleau, Jacques D and Saucier, Jean-françois, "Preference for a First-born Boy in Western Societies", Journal of Biosocial Science  34 (2002), pp. 13--27.

[Milazzo 2012] Milazzo, Annamaria, "Son Preference, Fertility and Family Structure - Evidence from Reproductive Behavior among Nigerian Women", paper presented at the CRED-FUNDP Workshop, Namur, Belgium, Oct 23rd (2012).

[Newey 1987] Newey, Whitney K., "Efficient estimation of limited dependent variable models with endogenous explanatory variables", Journal of Econometrics  36, 3 (1987), pp. 231--250.

[Pande 2003] Pande, RohiniP., "Selective gender differences in childhood nutrition and immunization in rural India: The role of siblings", Demography  40, 3 (2003), pp. 395--418.

[Rosenzweig et al. 1980a] Rosenzweig, Mark R and Wolpin, Kenneth I, "Life-Cycle Labor Supply and Fertility: Causal Inferences from Household Models", Journal of Political Economy  88, 2 (1980), pp. 328--48.

[Rosenzweig et al. 1980b] Rosenzweig, Mark R and Wolpin, Kenneth I, "Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment", Econometrica  48, 1 (1980), pp. 227--40.

[Sen 1990] Sen, Amartya, "More Than 100 Million Women Are Missing", The New York Review of Books  (1990).

[Staiger et al. 1997] Staiger, Douglas and Stock, James H., "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments", Econometrica  65, 3 (1997), pp. 557--586.

[Trussell et al. 1985] Trussell, James and Martin, Linda and Feldman, Robert and Palmore, James and Concepcion, Mercedes and Bakar, Datin Abu, "Determinants of birth-interval length in the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia: a hazard-model Analysis", Demography  22, 2 (1985), pp. 145--168.

[UBOS 2013] UBOS, "Uganda Demographic and Health Survey 2011" (2013).





Appendix

[float Table:


[Table 9:
Effect on hours worked by mother (full results)<tab:appendixmotherh>
]


]

[float Table:


[Table 10:
Effect on hours worked by father (full results)<tab:Effect-on-maileappend>
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 11:
Effect on hours worked by children (full results) <tab:Effect-appchildren>
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 12:
Effect on hours spend on preparing fields (full results)<tab:prepappe>
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 13:
Effect on hours spend on input application (full results)<tab:applappend>
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 14:
Effect on hours spend on weeding (full results)<tab:timeweeding>
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 15:
Effect on hours spend on harvesting (full results)
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 16:
Total production (full tobit results)
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 17:
Total production per capita (full tobit results)
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 18:
Total area (full tobit results)
]
]

[float Table:


[Table 19:
Total yield (x1000 UGX per acre)
]
]

